Thanks to all of you who've signed on for this, which is my first RStudio webinar.
I'm going to talk about the package readxl, which I've recently done a maintenance release
on, and I want to talk a little bit about our sticker for readxl.
RStudio and many other package-producing entities have started to create these hex stickers
so that you can show your love for packages, and the one we made for readxl is supposed
to capture that really special feeling you get when you find out that the data you need
is actually in Excel.
So hopefully if you want one of these, you can find one of us in person at some meeting
and maybe we'll have them.
You can put them on your laptop to show your suffering.
So readxl is a package that finds itself inside a larger group of packages, which we're calling
the Tidyverse, and this I believe is still a subset of the Tidyverse, but the idea of
the Tidyverse is to take a collection of packages and make sure that they operate with a common
philosophy and a really similar interface so that it's easy to transfer expertise from
one package to the other.
It's easy to move objects from one package to another, and so readxl is the Tidyverse
solution for getting data out of Excel spreadsheets and into R. You see the URL for the website
up there.
It's still, I'd call it, sort of under development, but we're adding more and more packages to
it, and then we're increasingly adding content on the Tidyverse itself.
So it's certainly absolutely worth visiting at this point, and you can expect that to
increase in sort of quality and coverage over time.
Another really important sort of documentation, I would say, for the Tidyverse is there's
a recent book, although it's been online for quite a while, by Hadley Wickham and Garrett
Grolamund, both of our studio, called R for Data Science, and in some sense it's a meta-manual
for the Tidyverse, or you will certainly see the Tidyverse packages working in their natural
environment and working in concert with each other throughout that book.
So it's a really good resource, and you can buy a physical book, or if you go to this
URL that I'm showing there, it has always been developed in the open, and you can always
access the content online for free.
And below I have a graphic that we see in a lot of talks by Hadley and other people
who develop or work in the Tidyverse that's meant to depict a typical data science and
data analysis workflow.
And Read Excel is one of the packages we have to deal with that very first step, which
is importing data out of a spreadsheet and getting it into R in a favorable form to sort
of fly through the rest of this cycle at least as easily as possible.
A little bit of history on Read Excel.
So it was first released on CRAN in April of 2015, and that release was written entirely
by Hadley, and then about a year later it had a patch release, which I think was just
triggered by the need to update for compatibility with the package, so that didn't have a lot
of changes in it.
And so then it got its first major maintenance release about a month ago, which is when I
took over as the new maintainer and we moved the version up to one.
I feel like it is pretty feature complete, and we squashed lots of bugs and added a few
new features, which I will talk about today.
And in case you want to install it in the background while I chatter on a little bit
more.
So one way to get Read Excel installed on your computer is to install the entire Tidyverse.
So we now have a package called Tidyverse, which is kind of different from the concept
of the Tidyverse.
It's a meta package that will install the whole set of packages on your computer, or
you could install Read Excel all by itself.
So just install that package as Read Excel.
Then either way, you must load Read Excel individually.
You can actually call library Tidyverse, and it will load a subset of the Tidyverse packages
that are kind of called the core.
And Read Excel is not part of that core, because you wouldn't need it in almost every analysis.
It's only when you have a spreadsheet.
So you'll always have to load it explicitly on its own.
So I promised in my abstract to give a little bit of the landscape of our packages that
Read Excel lives in.
And the reason I wanted to do that is I figure anyone who's willing to spend an hour with
us talking about Excel must have some slightly non-trivial need to read Excel files.
And it's kind of interesting just to know where the packages fit in and why some packages
are harder to use than others or what the different features are.
So there's a huge set of packages that read Excel files, because this has been an important
area for a very long time, obviously.
So Read Excel might actually be the most recent entry into this group.
OpenXLSX is also fairly recent, and it uses a lot of the same stuff under the hood as
Read Excel.
Packages that have been around much longer are XLConnect, XLSX, and GData, RODBC.
And there are many more packages, some of which I link to actually from the readme of
Read Excel itself for dealing with very awkward data.
But so these are the ones probably that I consider the most comparable in terms of when
people look up packages, what they are considering using.
So when you're thinking about where does Read Excel fit in and which of these packages
are relevant to me, I think there's at least three things you need to consider.
So one, there's two broad classes of Excel files.
And unless someone's been evil, you'll be able to identify them from their file extension.
So .xls are the older Excel files.
In our documentation, we call them legacy files.
And those are files from Excel up to about 2007.
But there's plenty of systems today that are still producing .xls files, and in fact, Excel
itself is still quite content to produce these files.
And then the more modern file format is XLSX.
And that's what you're going to get by default coming out of Excel now.
And again, there's lots of third-party tools that'll be writing these sorts of files.
So the main question to ask is not about the files, but it's about the R package.
And there's sort of two main categories of R packages.
There are those that are self-contained versus the ones that have an external dependency.
And I'll talk about this just for a second.
So neither of these file formats is something that you want to parse by hand, all by yourself
from the ground up.
So all of the packages that read Excel files are standing on the shoulders of others and
have some sort of dependency where we're bringing in an existing library to parse the file.
And it turns out that the most comprehensive package for doing that is a Java system called
the Apache POI.
And so the packages that wrap Java have great functionality in the sense that you can almost
say if Excel can read this file, this package can read it because of all the accumulated
conventional wisdom in Apache POI.
And so that's why when you're writing an Excel reading package for R, it's very tempting
to use Java because you can take advantage of this pretty amazing resource.
And likewise, there are some sort of Perl scripts that have been around for a long time
that have a lot of smarts about reading Excel files.
And so we've taken another approach in ReadExcel, which is to bake everything you need into
the package.
And then the third huge component to think about is whether the package you're using
is oriented towards bringing in a rectangular piece of data, so a data frame usually, or
is it more focused on or capable of focusing on individual cells and formatting.
So here's where ReadExcel comes out on all of these points.
It is able to read XLS and XLSX.
It is self-contained.
So once you get it installed, which should be relatively trivial, and definitely let
us know if it is not, it will just work.
You don't need to configure an external dependency in the right place for it to work.
And it is explicitly focused on bringing in a rectangle of data.
So it is not a package that's going to reveal formatting for you, whereas some of those
others will.
So hopefully this gives you a sense of where Excel fits in.
I'm going to show you, this is a screenshot of one of the Excel workbooks that ships with
the package, because I like to use it a lot in examples.
And it's something I created recently, and I guess it's a bit morbid, actually.
It's a spreadsheet.
It felt, you know how we talked about a lot of, it feels like a lot of very famous beloved
people died recently around Christmas?
And so I actually made a spreadsheet of recent deaths.
And it's also more to show how we import data with different column types and whatnot.
So we're going to look at this sheet in a moment live in the IDE.
But the thing I want you to notice here is I tried to make it sort of a typical spreadsheet
where people have written some stuff at the top and some stuff at the bottom, which actually
brings me to my next poll.
I'll come out to that in just a second.
And so Read Excel is really focused on helping you find or identify this data rectangle and
bringing just that data rectangle in.
So that's indicated by this yellow box.
So Read Excel is highly focused on a data rectangle as opposed to absorbing an entire
spreadsheet in all of its glory.
So this would be a good time to launch the second poll of three.
So I don't know how that works.
And okay, you've got it up there.
Okay, so how would you describe the typical Excel file that you import?
And you do have to pick just one of these.
Are they always neat?
There's a data rectangle in the upper left-hand corner.
Are they always super awkward?
It feels like you're reading data from absolutely anywhere in this sheet.
Or I see a mix of both.
So have at that.
Yeah.
So this has been typical of my experience as well that you see a bit of both.
But actually, I'm happy for you people.
It looks like neat data rectangles still are a bit more prevalent than awkward data in
any case.
All right, thanks.
The second point I want to make is that the IDE, the RStudio IDE, has a really nice little
helper for getting Excel files loaded into R.
So this is a screen capture of that.
And we will show that to you live.
And this is me importing that same spreadsheet.
And you can see a lot of the same data there in the data preview.
And below in the import options, we've exposed some of the most useful arguments for the
main function of the package, readExcel.
And you can see a preview of the code you would need to write to get that.
So we will talk soon about the RStudio IDE and the Excel helper.
You'll see that demonstrated.
And here's a screenshot right after I've brought that data set in.
And we have a data frame in R. It's a TIBL, which is a special flavor of data frame that
is arguably the strongest theme that runs throughout the tidyverse.
So it prints very nicely, which we're enjoying right here.
So you see we've got a TIBL that we brought in from Excel.
It has 10 rows.
It has six variables.
And the thing I really want you to focus on is notice the types of the variables.
That's one of the nice features of TIBL printing that you get to see these types.
So name and profession are character vectors.
Age is double or numeric.
Class kids is a logical vector, true or false.
Date of birth is a POSIX CT date time.
And the code right above there actually brought this data set in, and you can see that I didn't
have to specify any of those column types.
ReadExcel guessed them, and in this case, guessed them correctly.
So I would describe readExcel's column typing as pretty groovy when it works.
You can also take explicit control, which we'll show in the demo.
The last thing I want to point out before we switch to the IDE.
So here I'm importing that same data set.
It turns out it has two worksheets or two tabs, and they have the same structure.
They all have name, age, has kids, all those same variables.
And so one thing I want to point out before we're all done here is that readExcel can
be used quite nicely in workflows.
And so what I'm showing here is I'm reading that workbook, but I'm reading both sheets,
and I'm gluing them together row-wise to get one big data frame that has the data from
the first sheet and the second sheet and has a variable indicating which sheet it came
from.
And this seems to me to be an under-known, underutilized feature.
The mapDF function I've circled there is not from readExcel, it's from Per, another member
of the Tidyverse.
But so I do really want to make sure that people are aware of these iterative workflows
so that you have solutions when you have multiple worksheets in a workbook or you have multiple
workbooks that you need to import.
So there are going to be some demonstrations of workflows.
And this is actually where I want to ask my last poll, which is I'm curious to know if
most people use Excel in an artisanal way, sorry, readExcel in an artisanal way, or at